Communicate change where folks will come in contact with it
--------------------------
Whether we like it or not, we Sysadmins are all about "me". When someone
else sends an email about something, our interest in that thing is
inversely proportional to the length of the email. When stuff breaks at
3am and we **know** there was an email sent out about that - we go
looking and can't find it - so we call the person who sent it. There is
a better way. 

This post is about communication & documentation for day to day stuff.
This is not the documentation you dig through when you have all day to
sort out a problem. This is the stuff you want now.

Pop the hood on any car and you'll see an example of this documentation,
right there, all the stuff you are most likely to care about when you
are looking under the hood. It doesn't matter if you've ever driven this
car or not - the documentation is placed as close to the problem as it
can get. 

Here are some examples. 

### Communication in your Config Management System

Today, most of your configuration related changes should be distributed
through some sort of CM system. Since this is where most folks will go
looking for the status of things when they break, this is a great place
to document the status of things as they are changing. Here are some
examples using puppet as the CM.

#### Identify files that are managed by the CM system
At the top of every file managed by your config management system you
should have a line that looks something like this:

  # This file is managed by puppet - any changes made to this file
  # directly will be deleted
  # Source: puppet/modules/wibble/templates/wibble_a.erb

This makes it perfectly clear where to find this file if you want to
edit it. 

If you are moving things from one CM to another, tag the old ones too so
people can tell which system is the source for a particular file. 

#### Tell users about things they should know when they are running the CM manually or debugging it
If there's important information you want people to know about when they
run your CM in debug mode (presumably looking for problems) you can
usually add notifications. Comments in the code are great if someone is
looking in the right place, but this directs them to that place:

In puppet you can do this:

    class java {
      notify { "WARNING: This module (java) is experimental and may break things!":; }

And you should see something like this when you run the manifests by
hand:

    notice: WARNING: This module (java) is experimental and may break things!

#### Send short email messages when things are changing, with links to more details
If you are making major changes to your CM and you need people to be
aware, send a short email out with a link to details. Make sure you
include enough keywords to make it searchable later on, but short enough
to ensure people read it:

    Everyone,
      I am renaming the 2 puppet modules 'wibble' and 'wobble'. I will be 
    working on this over the next 2 days. This work is being done on the
    'wibblewobble' branch. An explanation of these changes can be found
    here: http://wiki/why-wibblewobble-must-change .

And add a notify to those modules warning users. Add comments to those
modules where users will see them. Put links to your wiki in both
places. 

### Leverage your MOTD

It's very common to be working on a system and need to let people know
you do not want them making changes to the system or disturbing the
state of things. It's fine to send email about this, but don't get
stabby when someone forgets about your email at 4am and "fixes" the
system. 

My preference is always to put a message in the MOTD telling them about
this. Let's say I have stopped httpd on a system for a few days & I've 
acked the alert in Nagios - I will also add this to the MOTD:

    ***************************************************
    NOTE: This system has httpd stopped for maintenance
    We are resolving some network problems on this host
    contact anichols@example.com if you have questions. 

### If a script shouldn't be run - break it

In the above example we had httpd turned off because we were resolving
some issues. If you are in an environment where enabling httpd would
cause a service impacting event - make that harder to do.

If I want a script to stop running, and this includes init scripts or
others, I will typically disable the script with an exit along with a
message to let the user know:

    start() {
            # SCRIPT DISABLED - anichols 11/11/11
            # See http://wiki/why-I-disabled-httpd-on-this-host for more info
            echo "This script is disabled, see http://wiki/why-I-disabled-httpd-on-this-host for more detail"
            exit

So when someone tries to use it they see this:

    [~]$ sudo /etc/init.d/httpd start
    This script is disabled, see http://wiki/why-I-disabled-httpd-on-this-host for more detail

You can do fancy stuff like conditionals so certain users can run the
script even, but the point is - communicate what's going on where the
user will come in contact with the change.

### If you have migrated to using a new tool, put a header on the old one

As an example, you are moving some graphing from cacti to Graphite & you
want users to know about it. You want to keep the old cacti instance up
because it has valuable historical data you haven't moved yet, but you
want folks to stop asking you why the cacti graphs aren't accurate. 

At the top of cacti, in the header, put something like this:

    <font color=red>
    <strong>This cacti data is no longer updated</strong><br>
    This data is here for archival purposes, for current data visit
    http://awesome-graphite-url
    </font>

It's simple & people will see it. If they don't - you can safely ignore
their pleas of ignorance. 

### You get the point, the point is...

When you are working on systems and making changes, think about the
other people who will come in contact with your change and how you can
make it painfully obvious to them what is going on. Think about your own
thoughtless patterns when you are bleary eyed at 3am, what would make it
easy for you to know what is going on. 


